cellxgene schema 2.0.0 (#67)
chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation: schema/2.0.0/corpora_schema.md

*   Because it is impractical to retain all barcodes in raw and final matrices, any cell filtering MUST be applied to both.
    By contrast, those wishing to reuse datasets require access to raw gene expression values, so genes MUST NOT be filtered from either dataset.
    Summarizing, any cell barcodes that are removed from the data MUST be filtered from both raw and final matrices and genes MUST NOT be filtered from the raw matrix.
*   Any genes that publishers wish to filter from the final matrix MAY have their values replaced by a language appropriate "null" value (e.g. [`np.nan`](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/constants.html#numpy.nan) for python), which will mask them from exploration.
*   Additional layers provided at author discretion MAY be stored using author-selected keys, but MUST have the same cells and genes as other layers.

The following table describes the matrix data and layers requirements that are **assay-specific**. If an entry in the table is empty, the cellxgene schema does not have any other requirements on data in those layers beyond the ones listed above.

> | Assay | "raw" required? | "raw" requirements | "final" required? | "final" requirements | Other layers |

Reviewer: I think it was specifically added to ATAC/methylation-seq because several times we have gotten the question of whether we support non-gene data.

If it makes it confusing we could add a sentence for the sc-RNA seq rows in the ' column "raw" required? ', indicating that values must correspond to ENSEBML genes. 

@brianraymor I think this will be your decision.

> | Assay | "raw" required? | "raw" requirements | "final" required? | "final" requirements | Other layers |

Author: > I think it was specifically added to ATAC/methylation-seq because several times we have gotten the question of whether we support non-gene data.

2.0.0 only supports "gene" as a `feature_biotype` so it's clear that there is NOT support for non-gene data.  I will delete as redundant. 

I've debated whether to move the `X` section after the discussions of `obs` and `var` which might clarify that point.

> | Assay | "raw" required? | "raw" requirements | "final" required? | "final" requirements | Other layers |

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/5395be955930cae03eadd7a66058a38196b83e69

|-|-|-|-|-|-|
| scRNA-seq (UMI, e.g. 10x v3) | REQUIRED in `AnnData.raw.X` unless no "final" is provided, then `AnnData.X` | Values MUST be de-duplicated molecule counts. | STRONGLY RECOMMENDED |  | OPTIONAL |

> | scRNA-seq (non-UMI, e.g. SS2) | REQUIRED in `AnnData.raw.X` unless no "final" is provided, then `AnnData.X` | Values MUST be one of read counts (e.g. FeatureCounts) or  estimated fragments (e.g. output of RSEM). | STRONGLY RECOMMENDED |  | OPTIONAL |

Reviewer: I agree that this could be useful to have somewhere, maybe in uns. However this type of information we don't use anywhere and we are not planning on using it anytime soon. I would lean towards not adding it in this iteration, as we have tried to keep it as minimal as possible to speed up the update of the validator and migration of data.

> | scRNA-seq (non-UMI, e.g. SS2) | REQUIRED in `AnnData.raw.X` unless no "final" is provided, then `AnnData.X` | Values MUST be one of read counts (e.g. FeatureCounts) or  estimated fragments (e.g. output of RSEM). | STRONGLY RECOMMENDED |  | OPTIONAL |

Author: @ambrosejcarr - is this something that you want to track for consideration in a future version of the schema?

> | scRNA-seq (non-UMI, e.g. SS2) | REQUIRED in `AnnData.raw.X` unless no "final" is provided, then `AnnData.X` | Values MUST be one of read counts (e.g. FeatureCounts) or  estimated fragments (e.g. output of RSEM). | STRONGLY RECOMMENDED |  | OPTIONAL |

Reviewer 2: > @ambrosejcarr - is this something that you want to track for consideration in a future version of the schema?

No. I think it's fairly easily inferred from the matrix data type + assay type.

| Accessibility (e.g. ATAC-seq, mC-seq) | NOT REQUIRED |  | REQUIRED in `AnnData.X` | Values MUST correspond to ENSEMBL gene identifiers  | OPTIONAL |
||||

## Integration Metadata

cellxgene requires ontology terms to enable search, comparison, and integration of data.
Ontology terms for cell metadata MUST use [OBO-format identifiers](http://www.obofoundry.org/id-policy.html), meaning a CURIE (prefixed identifier) of the form **Ontology:Identifier**.
For example, [EFO:0000001](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/efo/terms?short_form=EFO_0000001) is a term in the `EFO` ontology.

When no appropriate ontology value is available, then the most precise accurate term MUST be used.
For example if the `cell_type` field describes a relay interneuron, but the most specific available term in the CL ontology is [CL:0000099](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/cl/terms?obo_id=CL:0000099) for "interneuron", then the interneuron term can be used to fulfill this requirement and ensures that users searching for "neuron" are able to find these data.
Users will still be able to access more specific cell type annotations that have been submitted with the data (but aren't required by the schema).

> A dataset comprising cells of the human embryo provides a more extreme example.

Reviewer: > A dataset comprising cells of the human embryo provides a more extreme example. In this case, the most precise accurate term is CL:0000003 for "native cell".

This sentence meant to transmit the message of "we require that ALL cells have a CL term, please choose most appropriate term that applies to each even if it's a high-level definition, if there's not appropriate term or the cell type is unknown please use the highest-level term available "native cell".  These last instance happened a few times in one embryonic dataset which why it was highlighted.

I agree that the sentence could be miss-leading. @brianraymor  if you think it's worth editing please do so.

> A dataset comprising cells of the human embryo provides a more extreme example.

Author: How about:

When no appropriate ontology value is available, then the most accurate term MUST be used. 

For example if the `cell_type` field describes a relay interneuron, but the most specific available term in the CL ontology is [CL:0000099](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/cl/terms?obo_id=CL:0000099) for "interneuron", then the interneuron term can be used to fulfill this requirement and ensures that users searching for "neuron" are able to find these data. If no appropriate high-level term can be found or the cell type is unknown, then the most accurate term is [CL:0000003](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/cl/terms?obo_id=CL:0000003) for "native cell".

Users will still be able to access more specific cell type annotations that have been submitted with the dataset (but aren't required by the schema).

> A dataset comprising cells of the human embryo provides a more extreme example.

Reviewer: This works!

> A dataset comprising cells of the human embryo provides a more extreme example.

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/671de23c8606546fa0eee2a479d22e2c47a711a5

In this case, the most precise accurate term is [CL:0000003](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/cl/terms?obo_id=CL:0000003)
for "native cell".

### Required Ontologies

> The following ontology dependencies are *pinned* for this version of the schema.

Reviewer 3: What are the implications of the pinned versions on the submitter?

Author: These are versions of ontologies and gene annotations referenced by cellxgene-schema to validate the related metadata. It implies that when remapping author metadata, the submitter should ensure that they're using identifiers that are appropriate for these versions. Otherwise, validation will fail.

Reviewer 3: So perhaps guidance is need for these cases...
Incredibly likely to occur - Researcher mapped to v19 annotation, and that contains Gene IDs that are no longer present in 2020-A v32. What are they expected to do with those Genes that are not in the pinned version?
Less likely, but possible - Researcher identifies new cell type, or a gap in CL, and requests new term. They get the CL term before the pinned ontology version updates to include that CL term.

Author: I defer to @ambrosejcarr - we're aware of the issues. Obsolete terms - my sense is that the curator must use the related web sites to find out what happened to that obsoleted term and re-map it. Freshly baked terms - Dunno. Map to the most accurate existing CL term and include the approved term in parentheses as a suffix? 

We haven't deeply reached how frequently each ontology is updated to consider whether/when we need to update to 2.0.1 to include an updated ontology like CL.

There's also the issue with using the related OLS/ENSEMBL REST API(s) for validation and having versions "drift" in the existing data corpus.

Reviewer 2: > Researcher mapped to v19 annotation, and that contains Gene IDs that are no longer present in 2020-A v32

@jahilton why are IDs typically deleted? Would it be wrong simply to drop them?

> Freshly baked terms - Dunno. Map to the most accurate existing CL term and include the approved term in parentheses as a suffix?

This seems reasonable to me.

Reviewer 3: >Map to the most accurate existing CL term and include the approved term in parentheses as a suffix?

I like this. Possible to validate against 'live' CL version & very handy to update it once the pinned ontology catches up
>@jahilton why are IDs typically deleted? Would it be wrong simply to drop them?

In that scenario, I think the main cause for dropping wouldn't be that a gene was retired/deleted between the run version & the pinned version (those feel OK to drop, maybe even responsible). It would be that the gene changed biotype (was a 'protein coding gene' in v19, but is 'pseudogene' in v32) or the researcher did not filter the same biotypes as 10x does. The latter is the situation where you definitely do not want to drop because the researcher made a decision to include them in their reference. Perhaps using the v32 reference from GENCODE that does not filter biotypes as the pinned reference is a way to adjust for those.

Author: RE the special case for new CL terms that do not exist in the pinned version - I've thought about this more and am concerned that we would be asked for similar exceptions for every ontology. It may be preferable to update the schema (2.0.1) on a regular cadence when important changes are noted or discovered in ontologies. @ambrosejcarr and @pablo-gar - thoughts?

Reviewer: I agree, unfortunately it's one of the trade offs of having a pinned ontology, but the benefits seem to be greater. And yes this risk can be reduced by schema updates on a frequent basis or per-request basis.

| [ENSEMBL (Human)] | Human reference GRCh38 (GENCODE v32/Ensembl 98)] matching [cellranger 2020-A (July 7, 2020) release] | [gencode.v32.primary_assembly.annotation.gtf] |
| [ENSEMBL (Mouse)] | Mouse reference mm10 (GENCODE vM23/Ensembl 98) matching [cellranger 2020-A (July 7, 2020) release]| [gencode.vM23.primary_assembly.annotation.gtf] |
|||

[ENSEMBL (Human)]: http://www.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/Info/Index
[gencode.v32.primary_assembly.annotation.gtf]:http://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/gencode/Gencode_human/release_32/gencode.v32.primary_assembly.annotation.gtf.gz"

[ENSEMBL (Mouse)]: http://www.ensembl.org/Mus_musculus/Info/Index
[gencode.vM23.primary_assembly.annotation.gtf]:http://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/gencode/Gencode_mouse/release_M23/gencode.vM23.primary_assembly.annotation.gtf.gz"

[cellranger 2020-A (July 7, 2020) release]: https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-gene-expression/software/release-notes/build

## `obs` (Cell Metadata)

`obs` is a [`pandas.DataFrame`](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/reference/api/pandas.DataFrame.html).

Curators MUST annotate the following columns in the `obs` dataframe:

| Key | Value | Annotator |
|-|-|-|

> | assay_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be a child of "experimental process". See [EFO:0002694](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/efo/terms?short_form=EFO_0002694) for details. If there is not an exact match for the assay, *clarifying text* MAY be appended in parentheses such as `" (sci-plex)"`. | Curator |

Author: Are you interpreting _This MUST be a child of "experimental process"._ as a requirement for labels instead of EFO term identifiers? We added this yesterday as a clarification, although I was worried that it would prove confusing. Previously, it was _child of EFO:0002694_.

Or are you recommending a specific list of examples using EFO identifiers? For example, this is the current set of assays (with many duplicate labels at the moment):

```
{"10X 3' v2 sequencing : EFO:0009899",
 '10X sequencing : EFO:0008995',
 "10x 3' v2 : EFO:0009899",
 "10x 3' v2 sequencing : EFO:0009899",
 "10x 3' v3 : EFO:0009922",
 "10x 3' v3 sequencing : EFO:0009922",
 "10x 5' v1 : ",
 "10x 5' v3 sequencing : EFO:0009921",
 '10x Genomics : EFO:0008995',
 '10x technology : EFO:0008995',
 '10x v2 : EFO:0009310',
 '10x v3 : EFO:0009898',
 '10x v3 sequencing : EFO:0009898',
 'ATAC 10x v1 : ',
 'CITE-Seq : EFO:0009294',
 'CITE-seq : EFO:0009294',
 'Drop-seq : EFO:0008722',
 'MERFISH : EFO:0008992',
 'Seq-Well : EFO:0008919',
 'Smart-seq : EFO:0008930',
 'Smart-seq2 : EFO:0008931',
 'Smart-seq2 protocol : EFO:0008442',
 'Visium Spatial Gene Expression : EFO:0010961',
 'methylation profiling : EFO:0000751',
 'microwell-seq : ',
 'scATAC-seq : EFO:0010891',
 'scRNA-seq : EFO:0008913',
 'sci-RNA-seq : EFO:0010550',
 'sci-plex : '}
```

> | assay_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be a child of "experimental process". See [EFO:0002694](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/efo/terms?short_form=EFO_0002694) for details. If there is not an exact match for the assay, *clarifying text* MAY be appended in parentheses such as `" (sci-plex)"`. | Curator |

Reviewer 3: The latter. I would suggest the latter, a specific list of examples.
Currently, the data from existing datasets of '10X sequencing', '10x 3' v3 sequencing', and 'scRNA-seq' sequencing are all produced from the same assay, yet their metadata do not reflect that even though each follows the schema requirements.
Some additional guidance or requirement, or list of examples, is needed to ensure that a single process is represented consistently across the submissions.

> | assay_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be a child of "experimental process". See [EFO:0002694](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/efo/terms?short_form=EFO_0002694) for details. If there is not an exact match for the assay, *clarifying text* MAY be appended in parentheses such as `" (sci-plex)"`. | Curator |

Author: > Currently, the data from existing datasets of '10X sequencing', '10x 3' v3 sequencing', and 'scRNA-seq' sequencing **are all produced from the same assay,** yet their metadata do not reflect that even though each follows the schema requirements.

What is your specific proposal because I can interpret your remarks in two ways:

1. Require more specific terms than '10X sequencing' and 'scRNA-seq'. (And I note that the '10X sequencing label' does not match its EFO identifier.)
2. Use the most high-level term for a family of assays such as [EFO:0008995](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/efo/terms?short_form=EFO_0008995) for
'10x technology' which would not align with our guidance to use the most specific term available.

> | assay_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be a child of "experimental process". See [EFO:0002694](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/efo/terms?short_form=EFO_0002694) for details. If there is not an exact match for the assay, *clarifying text* MAY be appended in parentheses such as `" (sci-plex)"`. | Curator |

Reviewer 3: Door `1`, please - require more specific terms
I think the guidance to use the most specific term available is not very clear.
I see "When no appropriate ontology value is available, then the most accurate term MUST be used.", which is close, but not as direct. Perhaps rephrasing that to "The most accurate term MUST be used, even when no available ontology term perfectly captures the value"...but then note the exceptions (development stage)

> | assay_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be a child of "experimental process". See [EFO:0002694](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/efo/terms?short_form=EFO_0002694) for details. If there is not an exact match for the assay, *clarifying text* MAY be appended in parentheses such as `" (sci-plex)"`. | Curator |

Author: @ambrosejcarr, @pablo-gar, and I need to review how to _tighten up_ the guidance for assays. Perhaps, if it's 10X technology, then it MUST be a child of EFO:0008995. We need a MUST statement that can be implemented in code; otherwise, it's a SHOULD.

> | assay_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be a child of "experimental process". See [EFO:0002694](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/efo/terms?short_form=EFO_0002694) for details. If there is not an exact match for the assay, *clarifying text* MAY be appended in parentheses such as `" (sci-plex)"`. | Curator |

Reviewer 3: >We need a MUST statement that can be implemented in code; otherwise, it's a SHOULD.

I think it's going to be a SHOULD. You won't know that it's 10x unless you're reading the paper, so the code won't know if 'scRNA-seq' is an allowable term.

> | assay_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be a child of "experimental process". See [EFO:0002694](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/efo/terms?short_form=EFO_0002694) for details. If there is not an exact match for the assay, *clarifying text* MAY be appended in parentheses such as `" (sci-plex)"`. | Curator |

Author: Reviewing a spreadsheet of our current set of assays and their "parents" with Ambrose and Pablo. There are already some obsolete terms too.

> | assay_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be a child of "experimental process". See [EFO:0002694](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/efo/terms?short_form=EFO_0002694) for details. If there is not an exact match for the assay, *clarifying text* MAY be appended in parentheses such as `" (sci-plex)"`. | Curator |

Author: Something like:

An assay based on 10X Genomics products SHOULD be EFO:0008995 for “10x technology” or the most accurate child of EFO:0008995. Other assays SHOULD be the most accurate child of either EFO:0002772 for “assay by molecule” or EFO:0010183  for “single cell library construction”. If there is not an exact match for the assay, *clarifying text* MAY be appended to the most accurate term in parentheses. For example, the sci-plex assay would be curated as “EFO:0010183 (sci-plex)” and cellxgene Data Portal would set its name to “single cell library construction (sci-plex)“.

> | assay_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be a child of "experimental process". See [EFO:0002694](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/efo/terms?short_form=EFO_0002694) for details. If there is not an exact match for the assay, *clarifying text* MAY be appended in parentheses such as `" (sci-plex)"`. | Curator |

Author: <table><tbody>
    <tr>
      <th>Key</th>
      <td>assay_ontology_term_id</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>Value</th>
        <td>This and that and the other thing. on and on and on. Recommended values per assay:
          <ul>
          <li>Use EFO00000 for 10x technology </li>
          <li>Use EFO00001 for SmartSeq-2 </li>
          <li>Use EFO00002 for ATAC-seq </li>
          </ul>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
    <th>Annotator</th>
    <td>Curator<td>
    </tr>
</tbody></table>

> | assay_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be a child of "experimental process". See [EFO:0002694](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/efo/terms?short_form=EFO_0002694) for details. If there is not an exact match for the assay, *clarifying text* MAY be appended in parentheses such as `" (sci-plex)"`. | Curator |

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/138a06464458673c98ba4d2c4618f8eb4e5be477

| cell_type_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be a CL term. | Curator |

> | development_stage_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. If unavailable, this MUST be `"unknown"`. <br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:9606"`, this MUST be a HsapDv term.<br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:10090"`, this MUST a MmusDv term with the following restrictions: <br><br> **Prenatal stages** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000003" and ending with "MmusDv:0000035". <br><br> **Postnatal stages (1-4 weeks)** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000045" and ending with "MmusDv:0000048". <br><br> **Postnatal stages (after week 4)** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000062" and ending with "MmusDv:0000091". | Curator |

Reviewer: The reason why we specify it further in mouse is because we wanted curators to stick to months instead of weeks for post-natal stages, but there isn't a 1-month-old term id, in this case they'd need to use the last Theiler stages. I don't believe we have a similar issue in Human, if we there's one we should specify as well.

@brianraymor we could change the text to make it clearer and more concise. I suggest something like:

> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:10090"`, this MUST a MmusDv term with the following restrictions:
From the time of conception to 1 month after birth it MUST be a term id associated to "Theiler stages" (e.g. MmusDv:0000003), from 2 months after birth and further it MUST be a term id associated to "X months-old" (e.g. MmusDv:0000077)

> | development_stage_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. If unavailable, this MUST be `"unknown"`. <br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:9606"`, this MUST be a HsapDv term.<br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:10090"`, this MUST a MmusDv term with the following restrictions: <br><br> **Prenatal stages** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000003" and ending with "MmusDv:0000035". <br><br> **Postnatal stages (1-4 weeks)** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000045" and ending with "MmusDv:0000048". <br><br> **Postnatal stages (after week 4)** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000062" and ending with "MmusDv:0000091". | Curator |

Reviewer 3: It might be good to offer human guidance _if_ you don't want year-specific HsapDv terms (like several of the existing datasets have)

> | development_stage_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. If unavailable, this MUST be `"unknown"`. <br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:9606"`, this MUST be a HsapDv term.<br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:10090"`, this MUST a MmusDv term with the following restrictions: <br><br> **Prenatal stages** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000003" and ending with "MmusDv:0000035". <br><br> **Postnatal stages (1-4 weeks)** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000045" and ending with "MmusDv:0000048". <br><br> **Postnatal stages (after week 4)** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000062" and ending with "MmusDv:0000091". | Curator |

Reviewer: I think year specific is desired when available

> | development_stage_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. If unavailable, this MUST be `"unknown"`. <br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:9606"`, this MUST be a HsapDv term.<br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:10090"`, this MUST a MmusDv term with the following restrictions: <br><br> **Prenatal stages** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000003" and ending with "MmusDv:0000035". <br><br> **Postnatal stages (1-4 weeks)** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000045" and ending with "MmusDv:0000048". <br><br> **Postnatal stages (after week 4)** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000062" and ending with "MmusDv:0000091". | Curator |

Reviewer 3: Now I'm curious. For humans, you would like the most specific term possible, but for mouse, you'd like a term at a specific level of resolution even when a more specific term is available - why is that?

side note: if you would like the age term when possible for humans, it should be specified here. I think most researchers think "development stage" and will look for the term associated with "adult" rather than dig in and find the most specific term possible.

> | development_stage_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. If unavailable, this MUST be `"unknown"`. <br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:9606"`, this MUST be a HsapDv term.<br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:10090"`, this MUST a MmusDv term with the following restrictions: <br><br> **Prenatal stages** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000003" and ending with "MmusDv:0000035". <br><br> **Postnatal stages (1-4 weeks)** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000045" and ending with "MmusDv:0000048". <br><br> **Postnatal stages (after week 4)** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000062" and ending with "MmusDv:0000091". | Curator |

Reviewer: The "weeks" units maxes at 29 weeks (under 6 months old), we decided to go the "months old" unit as it applies to all stages allowing for easier integration and reusability. 

Do you think allowing for weeks may be a better option?

HsapDv seems to be better curated as there's no overlap at different stages and the level of granularity is great. But I think specific guidance would be helpful. Do you think the following adding the following could be useful?

- Embryonic stage : Carnegie stages 1-23 (up to 2 months after conception)
- Fetal development: 9th to 33rd week post-fertilization human stages (3 months after conception and before birth) 
- After birth: X-month-old human stages

> | development_stage_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. If unavailable, this MUST be `"unknown"`. <br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:9606"`, this MUST be a HsapDv term.<br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:10090"`, this MUST a MmusDv term with the following restrictions: <br><br> **Prenatal stages** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000003" and ending with "MmusDv:0000035". <br><br> **Postnatal stages (1-4 weeks)** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000045" and ending with "MmusDv:0000048". <br><br> **Postnatal stages (after week 4)** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000062" and ending with "MmusDv:0000091". | Curator |

Reviewer 3: I admittedly haven't sifted through the development ontologies in-depth (we sectioned them each into 5-7 chronologically sequential terms & then capture the age, in whatever units, separately).
So it was mainly my curiosity, but it makes sense that the differences in the ontologies warrant different approaches.
I do think that additional guidance for human stages would be good (the more guidance you can give on any field, the more likely you'll get the metadata submitted for the same entity/concept)

> | development_stage_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. If unavailable, this MUST be `"unknown"`. <br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:9606"`, this MUST be a HsapDv term.<br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:10090"`, this MUST a MmusDv term with the following restrictions: <br><br> **Prenatal stages** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000003" and ending with "MmusDv:0000035". <br><br> **Postnatal stages (1-4 weeks)** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000045" and ending with "MmusDv:0000048". <br><br> **Postnatal stages (after week 4)** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000062" and ending with "MmusDv:0000091". | Curator |

Author: @pablo-gar - can you clarify what specific guidance you want to propose for both hsapdv and mmusdv development_stages?

> | development_stage_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. If unavailable, this MUST be `"unknown"`. <br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:9606"`, this MUST be a HsapDv term.<br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:10090"`, this MUST a MmusDv term with the following restrictions: <br><br> **Prenatal stages** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000003" and ending with "MmusDv:0000035". <br><br> **Postnatal stages (1-4 weeks)** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000045" and ending with "MmusDv:0000048". <br><br> **Postnatal stages (after week 4)** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000062" and ending with "MmusDv:0000091". | Curator |

Reviewer: Based on the conversation, I think this is what makes the most sense

1. Add human guidance
2. For clarity change term ids for term labels 

Resulting in a text like this:

> categorical with `str` categories. If unavailable, this MUST be `"unknown"`. <br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:9606"` (_Homo sapiens_), this MUST be a HsapDv term with the following restrictions: <br> - Embryonic stage : MUST use term ids associated to "Carnegie stages 1-23" (up to 8 weeks after conception; e.g. HsapDv:0000003) <br> - Fetal development MUST be term ids of "9th to 33rd week post-fertilization human stages" (9 weeks after conception and before birth; e.g HsapDv:0000046) <br> - After birth MUST be term ids of the form "X-month-old human stage" (e.g. HsapDv:0000246) <br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:10090"` (_Mus musculus_), this MUST be a MmusDv term with the following restrictions: <br> - From the time of conception to 1 month after birth it MUST be a term id associated to "Theiler stages" (e.g. MmusDv:0000003) <br> - From 2 months after birth and further it MUST be a term id of the form "X months-old" (e.g. MmusDv:0000077)

> | development_stage_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. If unavailable, this MUST be `"unknown"`. <br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:9606"`, this MUST be a HsapDv term.<br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:10090"`, this MUST a MmusDv term with the following restrictions: <br><br> **Prenatal stages** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000003" and ending with "MmusDv:0000035". <br><br> **Postnatal stages (1-4 weeks)** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000045" and ending with "MmusDv:0000048". <br><br> **Postnatal stages (after week 4)** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000062" and ending with "MmusDv:0000091". | Curator |

Author: _- After birth MUST be term ids of the form "X-month-old human stage" (e.g. HsapDv:0000246)_

@pablo-gar - HsapDv doesn't have month term ids past 23 months? - http://www.ontobee.org/search?ontology=HSAPDV&keywords=month&submit=Search+terms

> | development_stage_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. If unavailable, this MUST be `"unknown"`. <br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:9606"`, this MUST be a HsapDv term.<br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:10090"`, this MUST a MmusDv term with the following restrictions: <br><br> **Prenatal stages** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000003" and ending with "MmusDv:0000035". <br><br> **Postnatal stages (1-4 weeks)** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000045" and ending with "MmusDv:0000048". <br><br> **Postnatal stages (after week 4)** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000062" and ending with "MmusDv:0000091". | Curator |

Reviewer: It was typo, it should have been "year" instead of month, which made me realized there's no "0-year-old human stage", for which we would need to include months

> categorical with `str` categories. If unavailable, this MUST be `"unknown"`. <br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:9606"` (_Homo sapiens_), this MUST be a HsapDv term with the following restrictions: <br> - Embryonic stage: it MUST be term ids associated to "Carnegie stages 1-23" (up to 8 weeks after conception; e.g. HsapDv:0000003) <br> - Fetal development MUST be term ids of "9th to 33rd week post-fertilization human stages" (9 weeks after conception and before birth; e.g HsapDv:0000046) <br> - After birth for the first 12 months it MUST be term ids of the form "X-month-old human stage" (e.g. HsapDv:0000174) <br> - After the first 12 months post-birth it MUST be term ids of the form "X-year-old human stage" (e.g. HsapDv:0000246) <br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:10090"` (_Mus musculus_), this MUST be a MmusDv term with the following restrictions: <br> - From the time of conception to 1 month after birth it MUST be a term id associated to "Theiler stages" (e.g. MmusDv:0000003) <br> - From 2 months after birth and further it MUST be a term id of the form "X months-old" (e.g. MmusDv:0000077)

> | development_stage_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. If unavailable, this MUST be `"unknown"`. <br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:9606"`, this MUST be a HsapDv term.<br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:10090"`, this MUST a MmusDv term with the following restrictions: <br><br> **Prenatal stages** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000003" and ending with "MmusDv:0000035". <br><br> **Postnatal stages (1-4 weeks)** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000045" and ending with "MmusDv:0000048". <br><br> **Postnatal stages (after week 4)** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000062" and ending with "MmusDv:0000091". | Curator |

Reviewer 3: >After the first 12 months post-birth it MUST be term ids of the form "X-year-old human stage" (e.g. HsapDv:0000246)

I would suggest adding guidance when the exact age cannot be reported for consent reasons. We sometimes see 5-10 year age ranges. And HIPAA regulations state that any age >89 should be grouped as "90+" because there are significantly fewer 90+ individuals that the exact age greatly increases identifiability

> | development_stage_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. If unavailable, this MUST be `"unknown"`. <br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:9606"`, this MUST be a HsapDv term.<br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:10090"`, this MUST a MmusDv term with the following restrictions: <br><br> **Prenatal stages** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000003" and ending with "MmusDv:0000035". <br><br> **Postnatal stages (1-4 weeks)** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000045" and ending with "MmusDv:0000048". <br><br> **Postnatal stages (after week 4)** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000062" and ending with "MmusDv:0000091". | Curator |

Author: @pablo-gar - RE

> Fetal development MUST be term ids of "9th to 33rd week post-fertilization human stages" (9 weeks after conception and before birth; e.g HsapDv:0000046)

The range is 9-**38** weeks in the [post-fertilization human stages category](
http://www.ontobee.org/search?ontology=HSAPDV&keywords=post-fertilization&submit=Search+terms).

with the 38th week described as "Fetal stage when the fetus is over 37 weeks of development and until birth."

Was **33** intentional or a typo?

> | development_stage_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. If unavailable, this MUST be `"unknown"`. <br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:9606"`, this MUST be a HsapDv term.<br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:10090"`, this MUST a MmusDv term with the following restrictions: <br><br> **Prenatal stages** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000003" and ending with "MmusDv:0000035". <br><br> **Postnatal stages (1-4 weeks)** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000045" and ending with "MmusDv:0000048". <br><br> **Postnatal stages (after week 4)** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000062" and ending with "MmusDv:0000091". | Curator |

Reviewer: Not intentional, thanks for double-checking!

> | development_stage_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. If unavailable, this MUST be `"unknown"`. <br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:9606"`, this MUST be a HsapDv term.<br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:10090"`, this MUST a MmusDv term with the following restrictions: <br><br> **Prenatal stages** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000003" and ending with "MmusDv:0000035". <br><br> **Postnatal stages (1-4 weeks)** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000045" and ending with "MmusDv:0000048". <br><br> **Postnatal stages (after week 4)** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000062" and ending with "MmusDv:0000091". | Curator |

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/138a06464458673c98ba4d2c4618f8eb4e5be477

| disease_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be a MONDO term or [PATO:0000461](http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/PATO_0000461) for "normal". | Curator |
| ethnicity_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:9606"`, this MUST be either a HANCESTRO term or `"unknown"` if unavailable. <br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is `"NCBITaxon:10090"`, this MUST be `"na"`. | Curator |

> | is_primary_data | `bool`. This MUST be `True` if this is the canonical instance of this cellular observation and `False` if not. This is commonly `False` for meta-analyses reusing data or for secondary views of data. | Curator |

Reviewer 2: > Would the submitter be expected to flag each cell as 'primary' exactly once across those?

Yes, they'd be expected to decide which view of each cell they wanted to mark as primary. For simplicity, I'd suggest the "all cells" view.

> | is_primary_data | `bool`. This MUST be `True` if this is the canonical instance of this cellular observation and `False` if not. This is commonly `False` for meta-analyses reusing data or for secondary views of data. | Curator |

Reviewer 3: Will they be a problem when 2 researchers each do their integrative analysis which includes a dataset from ArrayExpress that is not submitted to cellxgene? Those cells would appear in multiple collections/datasets on the Data Portal, but would not be marked as 'primary' in any case.

> | is_primary_data | `bool`. This MUST be `True` if this is the canonical instance of this cellular observation and `False` if not. This is commonly `False` for meta-analyses reusing data or for secondary views of data. | Curator |

Reviewer 2: The way we've solved that problem in the past is by asking the researcher to submit the original dataset on behalf of the lab whose data they're reusing. We have a dataset that will shortly be published that did this for all 5 datasets they used. 

That said, this might be something we need to resolve, yes. Mark one as primary and one as secondary. Do you see a better solution? It's important that our software only count datasets once when doing integrative visualizations.

> | is_primary_data | `bool`. This MUST be `True` if this is the canonical instance of this cellular observation and `False` if not. This is commonly `False` for meta-analyses reusing data or for secondary views of data. | Curator |

Reviewer 3: I had been wondering how you were going to avoid duplication once the integrations start - seems like a great solution to me. That info would be good in here somewhere. "If this is not the canonical instance of this observation and that instance has not already been submitted to the Data Portal..."
Curious how you'll validate each cell is 'primary' once, and no cell is 'primary' multiple times.

> | is_primary_data | `bool`. This MUST be `True` if this is the canonical instance of this cellular observation and `False` if not. This is commonly `False` for meta-analyses reusing data or for secondary views of data. | Curator |

Author: @ambrosejcarr - ^^^^ ?

> | is_primary_data | `bool`. This MUST be `True` if this is the canonical instance of this cellular observation and `False` if not. This is commonly `False` for meta-analyses reusing data or for secondary views of data. | Curator |

Reviewer 2: There are two options. For now I suggest option 2, since option 1 would be challenging to implement: 

1. Check if the raw cell expression vector has been submitted before. My intuition is that the probability of getting two identical expression vectors is very low, even into the billions of cells. We could run the Poisson statistics to check, of course. 
2. It's part of lattice's curation QA check. I think it's reasonable that you could catch the majority of cases because within-experiment duplication should be fairly obvious, and reuse of other previously submitted data should also be detectable because reusing someone else's data without citing them is very bad form. 

What do you think?

> | is_primary_data | `bool`. This MUST be `True` if this is the canonical instance of this cellular observation and `False` if not. This is commonly `False` for meta-analyses reusing data or for secondary views of data. | Curator |

Reviewer 3: 2 seems fine.
We have questions about how to go about submitting datasets as primary in order to allow the submission of the integration dataset anyway, so I think my other questions will be answered in that discussion

> | organism_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be either `"NCBITaxon:9606"` or `"NCBITaxon:10090"`. | Curator |

Author: Would it be helpful to include this in the **General Requirements** section?

> | organism_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be either `"NCBITaxon:9606"` or `"NCBITaxon:10090"`. | Curator |

Reviewer 3: Yes, that would be helpful.

> | organism_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be either `"NCBITaxon:9606"` or `"NCBITaxon:10090"`. | Curator |

Author: Added to editor's draft.

| sex_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be a child of "phenotypic sex". See [PATO:0001894](http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/PATO_0001894) for details. | Curator |

> | tissue_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be an UBERON term. This SHOULD be appended with `" (cell culture)"` or `" (organoid)"` if appropriate. | Curator |

Author: @ambrosejcarr and @pablo-gar ?

> | tissue_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be an UBERON term. This SHOULD be appended with `" (cell culture)"` or `" (organoid)"` if appropriate. | Curator |

Reviewer 2: Thanks @jahilton; this is a carry over from when we were attempting to model "brain organoid" or "brain cell line". You correctly identify that the latter is certainly insufficiently specific. 

So, two questions: 
1. Would you suggest we model organoids and CL separately? 
2. How would you recommend modeling them? And in the case of cell lines, can we do better than a term from {CL, EFO, BTO, CLO}? Would it be possible to pick one of those ontologies, or in pratice have you seen a need to use them all? How much resolution would be sacrificed if we were to pick the ontology that's the best fit?

> | tissue_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be an UBERON term. This SHOULD be appended with `" (cell culture)"` or `" (organoid)"` if appropriate. | Curator |

Reviewer 3: organoids - I think organoids makes sense, as proposed. Those map to UBERON terms, and you have a nice/simple way of specifying "(organoid)"

cell culture/lines - I think you can keep the general concept here - fill in the `tissue_ontology_term_id` and append "(cell culture)", just enforce CL terms, as opposed to UBERON. Even if the culture is of a common cell line, I think the relevant information is the _type_ of cell it is, and the specific cell line can be noted in additional fields, dataset/collection description, attached paper, etc. (So if they used WTC-11, they would submit it as the `fibroblast` CL term). This also allows the researcher to differentiate a common cell line into a different cell type.

> | tissue_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be an UBERON term. This SHOULD be appended with `" (cell culture)"` or `" (organoid)"` if appropriate. | Curator |

Reviewer 2: Thanks @jahilton this guidance makes sense to me. How does this text sound? I think it incorporates your suggested changes, and also addresses cases where someone has, for example, sorted monocyte lineage and would prefer to use [myeloid leukocyte](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/cl/terms?iri=http%3A%2F%2Fpurl.obolibrary.org%2Fobo%2FCL_0000766&viewMode=PreferredRoots&siblings=false) rather than a less specific UBERON term.  

categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be the most specific UBERON or CL term. This SHOULD be appended with `" (cell culture)"` or `" (organoid)"` if appropriate.

> | tissue_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be an UBERON term. This SHOULD be appended with `" (cell culture)"` or `" (organoid)"` if appropriate. | Curator |

Reviewer 3: Sounds good

> | tissue_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be an UBERON term. This SHOULD be appended with `" (cell culture)"` or `" (organoid)"` if appropriate. | Curator |

Reviewer 2: @brianraymor suggested being more verbose about our guidance here. My recommendation: 

`tissue_ontology_term_id`: categorical with `str` categories. MUST be the term that best describes the tissue that this cell was derived from. Takes different values depending on the type of biological sample.

**Tissue:** MUST be an UBERON term (e.g. UBERON:0008930 for a sematosensory cortex tissue sample)
**Organoid:** MUST be an UBERON term appended with " (organoid)" (e.g. `UBERON:0000955 (organoid)` for a brain organoid)
**Sorted cells from a tissue:** MUST be a CL term (e.g. [CL:0000766](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/cl/terms?iri=http%3A%2F%2Fpurl.obolibrary.org%2Fobo%2FCL_0000766&viewMode=PreferredRoots&siblings=false) for sorted myeloid cells)
**Cell Culture:** MUST be a CL term appended with " (cell culture)" (e.g. `CL:0000057` for WTC-11)

> | tissue_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be an UBERON term. This SHOULD be appended with `" (cell culture)"` or `" (organoid)"` if appropriate. | Curator |

Author: That @brianraymor is so demanding. Thanks Ambrose. 

> Cell Culture: MUST be a CL term appended with " (cell culture)" (e.g. CL:0000057 for WTC-11)

(e.g. **CL:0000057 (cell culture)** for the WTC-11 cell-line) ?

What are "sorted cells" ? Sounds like a _chocolate assortment_.

> | tissue_ontology_term_id | categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be an UBERON term. This SHOULD be appended with `" (cell culture)"` or `" (organoid)"` if appropriate. | Curator |

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/b2d031d088a1300cc7056fb8503cba64bcf5dd04

| Key | Value | Annotator |
:--|:--|:--
| assay | categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be appended with any *clarifying text* set in the matching identifier. | Data Portal |
| cell_type | categorical with `str` categories. | Data Portal |
| development_stage | categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be `"unknown"` if set in the matching identifier | Data Portal |
| disease | categorical with `str` categories | Data Portal |
| ethnicity | categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be `"na"` or `"unknown"` if set in the matching identifier. | Data Portal |
| organism | categorical with `str` categories | Data Portal |
| sex | categorical with `str` categories | Data Portal |
| tissue | categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be appended with `" (cell culture)"` or `" (organoid)"` if set in the matching identifier. | Data Portal |
| | | |

## `var` (Gene Metadata)

`var` is a [`pandas.DataFrame`](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/reference/api/pandas.DataFrame.html).

`var.index` MUST contain unique ENSEMBL gene identifiers for features. 

Curators MUST annotate the following columns in the `var` dataframe:

| Key | Value | Annotator |
:--|:--|:--

> | feature_biotype | This MUST be `"gene"`. | Data Portal |

Author: Good catch. Corrected in my editor's draft.

> | feature_biotype | This MUST be `"gene"`. | Data Portal |

Reviewer: Should this be Curator instead of Data Portal in anticipation of future biotypes other than gene?

Author: Jason already noted this in an earlier comment. Corrected in my editor's draft.

| feature_id (`var.index`) | `str`. This MUST be an ENSEMBL term from the gene annotation corresponding to the organism for the gene.  | Curator |
||||

When a dataset is uploaded, the cellxgene Data Portal MUST automatically add the matching human-readable name for the corresponding gene identifier to the `var` dataframe. Curators SHOULD NOT annotate the following column.

| Key | Value | Annotator |
:--|:--|:--
| feature_name | `str`. This MUST be the ENSEMBL gene name corresponding to the `feature_id`. | Data Portal |
||||

## `obsm` (Embeddings)

For each `str` key, `obsm` stores a `numpy.ndarray` of shape `(n_obs, m)`, where `n_obs` is the number of rows in `X` and `m >= 1`.

To display a dataset in cellxgene Explorer, Curators MUST annotate **one or more** two-dimensional (`m >= 2`) embeddings (e.g. tSNE, UMAP, PCA, spatial coordinates) in `obsm`. The key for the embedding MUST be prefixed with `X_`. The text that follows this prefix is presented to users in the cellxgene Explorer *Embedding Choice* selector.

> To illustrate, the [Krasnow Lab Human Lung Cell Atlas, 10X dataset](https://cellxgene.cziscience.com/e/krasnow_lab_human_lung_cell_atlas_10x-1-remixed.cxg/) in the [A molecular cell atlas of the human lung from single cell RNA sequencing collection](https://cellxgene.cziscience.com/collections/5d445965-6f1a-4b68-ba3a-b8f765155d3a) defines two embeddings in `obsm`:

Author: My intention is to include a reference to Max's curation tutorial when it's updated. Although I expect that curators are the primary readers of this document and are familiar with the portal model of collections and datasets.

* `'X_Compartment_tSNE'`
* `'X_tSNE'`

Users can then choose whether the 'Compartment_tSNE' or the 'tSNE' embedding  is visualized in cellxgene Explorer:

![Embeddings Illustration](images/embeddings.png
)

See also `default_embedding` in `uns`.

## `uns` (Dataset Metadata)

`uns` is a ordered dictionary with a `str` key. Curators MUST annotate the following keys and values in `uns`:

| Key | Value | Annotator |
:--|:--|:--|

> | layer_descriptions | `dict` with `str` keys and values. Keys MUST be the layer names whose values are free text descriptions for how the layer was created (e.g. "counts per million"). One key MUST be `"X"` which describes the transformations (if any) performed to produce the `X` matrix that cellxgene Explorer displays. If a raw layer is present, the layer description value MUST be `"raw"`. | Curator |

Reviewer: The assumption is correct, @jahilton would you recommend this to be clarified?

> | layer_descriptions | `dict` with `str` keys and values. Keys MUST be the layer names whose values are free text descriptions for how the layer was created (e.g. "counts per million"). One key MUST be `"X"` which describes the transformations (if any) performed to produce the `X` matrix that cellxgene Explorer displays. If a raw layer is present, the layer description value MUST be `"raw"`. | Curator |

Reviewer: I would say that there is an exception for ATAC/methylation seq. We don't require a raw layer, and thus the layer description should delineate how gene values were obtained with as much information as needed to the discretion of the curator.

> | layer_descriptions | `dict` with `str` keys and values. Keys MUST be the layer names whose values are free text descriptions for how the layer was created (e.g. "counts per million"). One key MUST be `"X"` which describes the transformations (if any) performed to produce the `X` matrix that cellxgene Explorer displays. If a raw layer is present, the layer description value MUST be `"raw"`. | Curator |

Reviewer 3: I think the existing wording leaves room for interpretation, but that's a good point about the different data types. The variety makes it difficult to be very specific. Perhaps some examples of what you expect to be included and at what level of detail would help.

> | layer_descriptions | `dict` with `str` keys and values. Keys MUST be the layer names whose values are free text descriptions for how the layer was created (e.g. "counts per million"). One key MUST be `"X"` which describes the transformations (if any) performed to produce the `X` matrix that cellxgene Explorer displays. If a raw layer is present, the layer description value MUST be `"raw"`. | Curator |

Author: We've been having an internal discussion about the purpose of `layer_description`, what's it good for, and who consumes it, so Jason's comment validates that it's ambiguous to some degree - especially with the new requirements about the location of the raw matrix. And the use of "layer" does not match conceptually with the 'X' section which does not rely on layers.

@pablo-gar and @ambrosejcarr - can you offer a rewrite that clearly describes the rationale for this field and offers guidance for how curators should complete it?

> | layer_descriptions | `dict` with `str` keys and values. Keys MUST be the layer names whose values are free text descriptions for how the layer was created (e.g. "counts per million"). One key MUST be `"X"` which describes the transformations (if any) performed to produce the `X` matrix that cellxgene Explorer displays. If a raw layer is present, the layer description value MUST be `"raw"`. | Curator |

Reviewer: Rationale:
1. To identify which layer contains raw data (adata.X or adata.raw.X)
2. To increase re-usability of non-raw data when available, in this case the information of adata.uns["layer_descriptions"] can be use by users who download the data and wish to understand the representation of expression values. 

Rewriting: 
> `dict` with `str` keys and values. Keys MUST be the layer names whose values are free text descriptions for how the layer was created. One key MUST be `"X"`. If a layer has raw data its value must be "raw", otherwise the value SHOULD accurately summarize what the numbers in the layer represent (e.g.  "counts per million", "SCTransform normalization")

> | layer_descriptions | `dict` with `str` keys and values. Keys MUST be the layer names whose values are free text descriptions for how the layer was created (e.g. "counts per million"). One key MUST be `"X"` which describes the transformations (if any) performed to produce the `X` matrix that cellxgene Explorer displays. If a raw layer is present, the layer description value MUST be `"raw"`. | Curator |

Reviewer 2: With deprecation of `cellxgene-schema apply`, there are no longer any application dependencies on `layer_descriptions`. 

The location of `raw` is specified by the schema, so the only reason to include layer descriptions for raw would be if we felt files should be self-describing, and we could write `layer_descriptions` using the validator.

Except for X, it would be cleaner simply to say, in the matrix layers section, *additional layers SHOULD have names that accurately summarize what the numbers in the layer represent (e.g. "counts_per_million" or "SCTransform_normalized")*, rather than creating a dict to describe badly named layers. 

Given that, my recommendation is: 
* `layer_descriptions` is removed
* a RECOMMENDED dataset metadata `normalization` is added that describes the normalization approach for X. It could use a controlled vocabulary, if we have appetite for standardizing this right now. Imperfect text: *"`normalization` SHOULD describe the method used to normalize the data stored in X. If data in X are raw, this value SHOULD be `none`"*
* guidance is added to `X (matrix layers)`: *additional layers SHOULD have names that accurately summarize what the numbers in the layer represent (e.g. "counts_per_million", "SCTransform_normalized", or "RNA_velocity_unspliced")*

> | layer_descriptions | `dict` with `str` keys and values. Keys MUST be the layer names whose values are free text descriptions for how the layer was created (e.g. "counts per million"). One key MUST be `"X"` which describes the transformations (if any) performed to produce the `X` matrix that cellxgene Explorer displays. If a raw layer is present, the layer description value MUST be `"raw"`. | Curator |

Author: Included in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/d473aa912d49748cd646c7312b7c19188a22a798

> | schema_version| `str`. This MUST be `"2.0.0"`. | Curator |

Author: There has always been a requirement for schema version and encoding version. I deprecated encoding version. In the past, Marcus used the schema version as a hint that validation had been performed with the intent to perform "shallow validation" on the portal during upload to reduce processing time. But in practice, the implementation actually performed another full validation.

I expect that we'll use it to _fast fail_ validation (if the curator failed to set the version then confidence is low), but it's defined for the potential to support multiple versions of schemas in validation and in portal processing - especially where the revision is additive.

> | schema_version| `str`. This MUST be `"2.0.0"`. | Curator |

Reviewer 3: Understood. Makes sense.

> | title | `str`. This text describes and differentiates the dataset from others in the same collection. It is displayed on a page in the cellxgene Portal that also has the collection name. To illustrate, the first dataset name in the [Cells of the adult human heart collection](https://cellxgene.cziscience.com/collections/b52eb423-5d0d-4645-b217-e1c6d38b2e72) is "All — Cells of the adult human heart". | Curator |

Author: Corrected in my editor's draft.

* **Redundant Metadata**. If a metadata key exists in the original dataset with a different name than required by the schema and with values that can be accurately mapped to the schema, it is STRONGLY RECOMMENDED that Curators request the permission of the author(s) to rename that key and remodel its values as needed to match the key and values in the schema to eliminate redundant metadata. Common cases are `"Sex"` instead of `"sex"` and `"Age"` instead of `"development_stage"`.

*   **No PII**. Curators agree to this requirement as part of the data submission policy.
    However, it is not strictly enforced in our validation tooling because it is difficult for software to predict what is and is not PII.
    It is up to the submitter to ensure that no metadata can be personally identifiable: no names, dates of birth, specific locations, etc.
    See this [list](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1sboOmbafvMh3VYjK1-3MAUt0I13UUJfkQseq8ANLPl8/edit) for guidance.

#### *Note on types*
The types below are python3 types. Note that a python3 `str` is a sequence of Unicode code points, which is stored null-terminated and UTF-8-encoded by anndata.

## `X` (Matrix Layers)

> cellxgene does not impose any additional constraints on the `X` data matrix.

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/4152194b7238c22b98c92ff9273d500bae878677

In any layer, if a matrix has 50% or more values that are zeros, it is STRONGLY RECOMMENDED that the matrix be encoded as a [`scipy.sparse.csr_matrix`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.sparse.csr_matrix.html).

cellxgene's matrix layer requirements are tailored to optimize data reuse. Because each assay has different characteristics, the requirements differ by assay type. In general,
cellxgene requires submission of "raw" data suitable for computational reuse when a standard raw matrix format exists for an assay and strongly recommends that a "final" matrix suitable for
visualization in the explorer be included. So that cellxgene's data can be provided in download formats suitable for both R and Python, the schema imposes the following requirements:

*   All matrix layers MUST have the same shape, and have the same cell labels and gene labels.
*   Because it is impractical to retain all barcodes in raw and final matrices, any cell filtering MUST be applied to both.
    By contrast, those wishing to reuse datasets require access to raw gene expression values, so genes MUST NOT be filtered from either dataset.

>     Summarizing, any cell barcodes that are removed from the data MUST be filtered from both raw and final matrices and genes MUST NOT be filtered from the raw matrix.

Reviewer 3: >genes MUST NOT be filtered from the raw matrix.

How will this be validated?

Author: @ambrosejcarr - is this a STRONGLY RECOMMENDED rather than a MUST?

Reviewer 2: > @ambrosejcarr - is this a STRONGLY RECOMMENDED rather than a MUST?

Yes. We could design some heuristics to catch cases where this is obviously broken but they would be assay-specific and probably more trouble than they're worth.

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/3de2a989d506c00a6b8374f8a92b6c5308dbc50e

This document describes the schema, a type of contract, that cellxgene requires all datasets to adhere to so that it can enable searching, filtering, and integration of datasets it hosts.

Note that the requirements in the schema are just the minimum required information. Datasets often have additional metadata, which is preserved in datasets submitted to the cellxgene Data Portal.

## Overview

This schema supports multiple assay types. Each assay takes the form of one or more two-dimensional matrices whose values are quantitative measures of the phenotypes of cells.

The schema additionally describes how the dataset, genes, and cells are annotated to describe the biological and technical characteristics of the data.

This document is organized by:
* [General requirements](#general-requirements)
* [`X` (Matrix layers)](#x-(matrix-layers)), which describe the data required for different assays
* [`obs` (Cell metadata)](#obs-(cell-metadata)), which describe each cell in the dataset
* [`var` (Gene metadata)](#var-(gene-metadata)), which describe each gene in the dataset
* [`obsm` (Embeddings)](#obsm-(embeddings)), which describe embeddings for each dataset

> * [`uns` (Dataset metadata](#uns-(dataset-metadata)), which describe the dataset as a whole

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/a0909191d6f636f2c857ece47eae5537d1ef9223

## General Requirements

* **AnnData** - The canonical data format for the cellxgene Data Portal is HDF5-backed [AnnData](https://anndata.readthedocs.io/en/latest) as written by version 0.7 of the anndata library.  Part of the rationale for selecting this format is to allow cellxgene to access both the data and metadata within a single file. The schema requirements and definitions for the AnnData `X`, `uns`, `obs`, and `obsm` attributes are described below.

*   **No PII**. Curators agree to this requirement as part of the data submission policy.
    However, it is not strictly enforced in our validation tooling because it is difficult for software to predict what is and is not PII.
    It is up to the submitter to ensure that no metadata can be personally identifiable: no names, dates of birth, specific locations, etc.
    See this [list](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1sboOmbafvMh3VYjK1-3MAUt0I13UUJfkQseq8ANLPl8/edit) for guidance.

#### *Note on types*
The types below are python3 types. Note that a python3 `str` is a sequence of Unicode code points, which is stored null-terminated and UTF-8-encoded by anndata.

## `X` (Matrix Layers)

> cellxgene does not impose any additional constraints on the `X` data matrix. It may be sparse or dense and any numeric [`numpy.dtype`](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/arrays.dtypes.html).

Author: Per slack conversation will be adding guidance about sparse matrices.

> cellxgene does not impose any additional constraints on the `X` data matrix. It may be sparse or dense and any numeric [`numpy.dtype`](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/arrays.dtypes.html).

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/9c1be50210421d4697a6484359dfb96b31b90947

cellxgene's data requirements are tailored to optimize data reuse. Because each assay has different characteristics, the requirements differ by assay type. In general,

> cellxgene requires submission of "raw" data suitable for computational reuse when a standard form exists and strongly recommends that a "final" matrix suitable for

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/a0909191d6f636f2c857ece47eae5537d1ef9223

visualization in the explorer be included. So that cellxgene's data can be provided in download formats suitable for both R and Python, the schema imposes the following requirements:

*   All matrix layers MUST have the same shape, and have the same cell labels and gene labels.

> *   Because it is impractical to retain all barcodes in raw and final matrices, any low quality cell filtering MUST be applied to both.

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/a0909191d6f636f2c857ece47eae5537d1ef9223

    By contrast, those wishing to reuse datasets require access to raw gene expression values, so genes MUST be present in both datasets.

>     Summarizing, any cell barcodes that are removed from the data MUST be filtered from both raw and final matrices and genes MUST NOT be filtered from the raw matrix.

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/188b2b514ee6a1bc75ae4be33c37120718e64804

*   Any genes that publishers wish to filter from the final matrix MAY have their values replaced by a language appropriate "null" value (e.g. [`np.nan`](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/constants.html#numpy.nan) for python), which will mask them from exploration.
*   Additional layers provided at author discretion MAY be stored using author-selected keys, but MUST have the same cells and genes as other layers.

> In addition to these general requirements, the following table describes the matrix data and layers requirements that are assay-specific. If an entry in the table is empty, the cellxgene schema does not have any other requirements on data in those layers beyond the ones listed above.

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/188b2b514ee6a1bc75ae4be33c37120718e64804

> This is usually the case when there are many ways to produce the matrix layer in question.

Author: https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/188b2b514ee6a1bc75ae4be33c37120718e64804

| Assay | "raw" required? | "raw" requirements | "final" required? | "final" requirements | Other layers |
|-|-|-|-|-|-|
| scRNA-seq (UMI, e.g. 10x v3) | REQUIRED in AnnData.layers["raw"] unless no "final" is provided, then AnnData.X | Values MUST be de-duplicated molecule counts. | STRONGLY RECOMMENDED |  | OPTIONAL |
| scRNA-seq (non-UMI, e.g. SS2) | REQUIRED in AnnData.layers["raw"] unless no "final" is provided, then AnnData.X | Values MUST be one of read counts (e.g. FeatureCounts) or  estimated fragments (e.g. output of RSEM). | STRONGLY RECOMMENDED |  | OPTIONAL |
| Accessibility (e.g. ATAC-seq, mC-seq) | NOT REQUIRED |  | REQUIRED in AnnData.X | Values MUST correspond to ENSEMBL gene identifiers  | OPTIONAL |

> ||||

Author: Yes.

For example [EFO:0000001](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/efo/terms?short_form=EFO_0000001) is a term in the `EFO` ontology.

When no appropriate ontology value is available, then the most precise accurate term MUST be used.
For example if the `cell_type` field describes a relay interneuron, but the most specific available term in the CL ontology is [CL:0000099](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/cl/terms?obo_id=CL:0000099) for "interneuron", then the interneuron term can be used to fulfill this requirement and ensures that users searching for "neuron" are able to find these data.
Users will still be able to access more specific cell type annotations that have been submitted with the data (but aren't required by the schema).
A dataset comprising cells of the human embryo provides a more extreme example.
In this case, the most precise accurate term is [CL:0000003](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/cl/terms?obo_id=CL:0000003)
for "native cell".

~~The Cell Ontology is expanding over time, and we hope to migrate datasets to more precise terms as they are defined.
In the meantime, using Cell Ontology terms maximizes the findability (and therefore reusability) of datasets.~~

> #### Gene Annotation

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/188b2b514ee6a1bc75ae4be33c37120718e64804

| [ENSEMBL (Human)] | Human reference GRCh38 (GENCODE v32/Ensembl 98)] matching [cellranger 2020-A (July 7, 2020) release] | [gencode.v32.primary_assembly.annotation.gtf] |
| [ENSEMBL (Mouse)] | Mouse reference mm10 (GENCODE vM23/Ensembl 98) matching [cellranger 2020-A (July 7, 2020) release]| [gencode.vM23.primary_assembly.annotation.gtf] |
|||

[ENSEMBL (Human)]: http://www.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/Info/Index
[gencode.v32.primary_assembly.annotation.gtf]:http://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/gencode/Gencode_human/release_32/gencode.v32.primary_assembly.annotation.gtf.gz"

[ENSEMBL (Mouse)]: http://www.ensembl.org/Mus_musculus/Info/Index
[gencode.vM23.primary_assembly.annotation.gtf]:http://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/gencode/Gencode_mouse/release_M23/gencode.vM23.primary_assembly.annotation.gtf.gz"

[cellranger 2020-A (July 7, 2020) release]: https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-gene-expression/software/release-notes/build

## `obs` (Cell Metadata)

`obs` is a [`pandas.DataFrame`](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/reference/api/pandas.DataFrame.html).

Curators MUST annotate the following columns in the `obs` dataframe:

| Key | Value | Annotator |
|-|-|-|

> | assay_ontology_term_id | `str` or categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be a child of [EFO:0002694](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/efo/terms?short_form=EFO_0002694). If there is not an exact match for the assay, *clarifying text* MAY be appended in parentheses such as " (sci-plex)". | Curator |

Author: > Question: In instances where we require a child of a specific term, what do you think about also including the label of the ontology? I think it makes it a bit more readable for people who are browsing the ontology to know that we're requiring, e.g. a MONDO disease term or PATO:0000461 (Normal).

I rewrote similar examples using the pattern:

[CL:0000003](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/cl/terms?obo_id=CL:0000003) for "native cell"

because I was concerned that curators might be confused by the text and attempt to annotate `PATO:0000461 (Normal)`.

> | assay_ontology_term_id | `str` or categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be a child of [EFO:0002694](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/efo/terms?short_form=EFO_0002694). If there is not an exact match for the assay, *clarifying text* MAY be appended in parentheses such as " (sci-plex)". | Curator |

Author: How about:

This MUST be a child of [EFO:0002694](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/efo/terms?short_form=EFO_0002694) which is "experimental process".

or

This MUST be a child of "experimental process". See [EFO:0002694](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/efo/terms?short_form=EFO_0002694).

> | assay_ontology_term_id | `str` or categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be a child of [EFO:0002694](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/efo/terms?short_form=EFO_0002694). If there is not an exact match for the assay, *clarifying text* MAY be appended in parentheses such as " (sci-plex)". | Curator |

Author: Flipped a coin. Addressed in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/a0909191d6f636f2c857ece47eae5537d1ef9223

> | assay_ontology_term_id | `str` or categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be a child of [EFO:0002694](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/efo/terms?short_form=EFO_0002694). If there is not an exact match for the assay, *clarifying text* MAY be appended in parentheses such as " (sci-plex)". | Curator |

Reviewer 2: Your choice looks good to me.

| cell_type_ontology_term_id | `str` or categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be a CL term. | Curator |
| development_stage_ontology_term_id | `str` or categorical with `str` categories. If unavailable, this MUST be "unknown". <br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is “NCBITaxon:9606", this MUST be a HsapDv term.<br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is “NCBITaxon:10090”, this MUST a MmusDv term with the following restrictions: <br><br> **Prenatal stages** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000003" and ending with "MmusDv:0000035". <br><br> **Postnatal stages (1-4 weeks)** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000045" and ending with "MmusDv:0000048". <br><br> **Postnatal stages (after week 4)** MUST be in the range beginning with "MmusDv:0000062" and ending with "MmusDv:0000091". | Curator |

> | disease_ontology_term_id | `str` or categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be a MONDO term or [PATO:0000461](http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/PATO_0000461) | Curator |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| disease_ontology_term_id | `str` or categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be a MONDO term or [PATO:0000461](http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/PATO_0000461) if healthy| Curator |
```

Author: Added "normal" for clarification. Addressed in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/a0909191d6f636f2c857ece47eae5537d1ef9223

| ethnicity_ontology_term_id | `str` or categorical with `str` categories. If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is “NCBITaxon:9606”, this MUST be either a HANCESTRO term or “unknown” if unavailable. <br><br> If `organism_ontolology_term_id` is “NCBITaxon:10090”, this MUST be "na". | Curator |
| is_primary_data | `Bool`. This MUST be `True` if this is the canonical instance of this cellular observation and `False` if not. This is commonly `False` for meta-analyses reusing data or for secondary views of data. | Curator |
| organism_ontology_term_id | `str` or categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be either "NCBITaxon:9606" or "NCBITaxon:10090". | Curator |
| sex_ontology_term_id | `str` or categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be a child of [PATO:0001894](http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/PATO_0001894) | Curator |

> | tissue_ontology_term_id | `str` or categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be an UBERON term. This SHOULD be appended with " (cell culture)" or " (organoid)" if appropriate. | Curator |

Reviewer: All `str` types in these categories are going to be converted to categorical, see [this](https://github.com/theislab/anndata/blob/0ec97410702f61b29acef80b6377d1232699fa94/anndata/_io/h5ad.py#L85). Thus there wont' be any `str` types.

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/a0909191d6f636f2c857ece47eae5537d1ef9223

| | | |

> Curators SHOULD NOT annotate the following columns in the `obs` dataframe which are the human-readable names that MUST match the corresponding ontology term identifier. These columns MUST be automatically annotated by the cellxgene Data Portal when a dataset is uploaded.

Author: Rewrote a bit. Addressed in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/a0909191d6f636f2c857ece47eae5537d1ef9223

| Key | Value | Annotator |
:--|:--|:--
| assay | `str` or categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be appended with any *clarifying text* set in matching identifier. | Data Portal |
| cell_type | `str` or categorical with `str` categories. | Data Portal |
| development_stage | `str` or categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be "unknown" if set in the matching identifier | Data Portal |
| disease | `str` or categorical with `str` categories | Data Portal |
| ethnicity | `str` or categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be "na" or "unknown" if set in the matching identifier. | Data Portal |
| organism | `str` or categorical with `str` categories | Data Portal |
| sex | `str` or categorical with `str` categories | Data Portal |
| tissue | `str` or categorical with `str` categories. This MUST be appended with " (cell culture)" or " (organoid)" if set in the matching identifier. | Data Portal |

> | | | |

Reviewer: All `str` types in these categories are going to be converted to categorical, see [this](https://github.com/theislab/anndata/blob/0ec97410702f61b29acef80b6377d1232699fa94/anndata/_io/h5ad.py#L85). Thus there wont' be any `str` types.

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/a0909191d6f636f2c857ece47eae5537d1ef9223

## `var` (Gene Metadata)

`var` is a [`pandas.DataFrame`](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/reference/api/pandas.DataFrame.html).

`var.index` MUST contain unique ENSEMBL gene identifiers for features. 

Curators MUST annotate the following columns in the `var` dataframe:

| Key | Value | Annotator |
:--|:--|:--
| feature_biotype | This MUST be "gene". | Data Portal |
| feature_id (`var.index`) | `str`. This MUST be an ENSEMBL term from the gene annotation corresponding to the organism for the gene.  | Curator |
||||

> Curators SHOULD NOT annotate the following column in the `var` dataframe which is the human-readable name that MUST match the corresponding gene identifier. This column MUST be automatically annotated by the cellxgene Data Portal when a dataset is uploaded.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a dataset is uploaded, the cellxgene Data Portal will automatically add to the `var` dataframe the following human-readable names that MUST match the corresponding gene identifier. Curators SHOULD NOT annotate the following columns.
```

Same restructuring recommendation as in `obs`.

Author: Rewrote a bit. Addressed in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/a0909191d6f636f2c857ece47eae5537d1ef9223

Reviewer 2: I like it.

| Key | Value | Annotator |
:--|:--|:--
| feature_name | `str`. This MUST be the ENSEMBL gene name corresponding to the `feature_id`. | Data Portal |
||||

## `obsm` (Embeddings)

For each `str` key, `obsm` stores a `numpy.ndarray` of shape `(n_obs, m)`, where `n_obs` is the number of rows in `X` and `m >= 1`.

> To display a dataset in cellxgene Explorer, Curators MUST annotate **one or more** two-dimensional (`m >= 2`) embeddings (tSNE, UMAP, PCA, spatial coordinates) in `obsm`. The key for the embedding MUST be prefixed with `X_`. The text that follows this prefix is presented to users in the cellxgene Explorer *Embedding Choice* selector.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To display a dataset in cellxgene Explorer, Curators MUST annotate **one or more** two-dimensional (`m >= 2`) embeddings (e.g. tSNE, UMAP, PCA, spatial coordinates) in `obsm`. The key for the embedding MUST be prefixed with `X_`. The text that follows this prefix is presented to users in the cellxgene Explorer *Embedding Choice* selector.
```

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/a0909191d6f636f2c857ece47eae5537d1ef9223

To illustrate, the [Krasnow Lab Human Lung Cell Atlas, 10X dataset](https://cellxgene.cziscience.com/e/krasnow_lab_human_lung_cell_atlas_10x-1-remixed.cxg/) in the [A molecular cell atlas of the human lung from single cell RNA sequencing collection](https://cellxgene.cziscience.com/collections/5d445965-6f1a-4b68-ba3a-b8f765155d3a) defines two embeddings in `obsm`:

> * 'X_Compartment_tSNE'
> * 'X_tSNE'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `'X_Compartment_tSNE'`
* `'X_tSNE'`
```
I prefer references to code to use code formatting.

Author: Rewrote a bit. Addressed in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/a0909191d6f636f2c857ece47eae5537d1ef9223

Users can then choose whether the 'Compartment_tSNE' or the 'tSNE' embedding  is visualized in cellxgene Explorer:

![Embeddings Illustration](images/embeddings.png
)

See also `default_embedding` in `uns`.

## `uns` (Dataset Metadata)

`uns` is a ordered dictionary with a `str` key. Curators MUST annotate the following keys and values in `uns`:

| Key | Value | Annotator |
:--|:--|:--|

> | layer_descriptions | `dict` with `str` keys and values. Keys MUST be the layer names whose values are free text descriptions for how the layer was created (e.g. "counts per million"). One key MUST be "X" which describes the transformations (if any) performed to produce the `X` matrix that cellxgene Explorer displays. | Curator |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| layer_descriptions | `dict` with `str` keys and values. Keys MUST be the layer names whose values are free text descriptions for how the layer was created (e.g. "counts per million"). One key MUST be "X" which describes the transformations (if any) performed to produce the `X` matrix that cellxgene Explorer displays. If a raw layer is present the layer description value MUST be "raw"| Curator |
```

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/a0909191d6f636f2c857ece47eae5537d1ef9223

## Purpose

This document describes the schema, a type of contract, that the cellxgene application expects all files to adhere to so that it can enable searching, filtering, and integration of datasets it hosts.
It is intentionally general because cellxgene supports multiple download formats, each of which adheres to this schema.

Users interested in creating a new format that adheres to the cellxgene schema or who want to understand what metadata all cellxgene files can be expected to carry should read this document.

Users interested in the schema's implementation should review the [encoding documents](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/tree/main/docs/encodings/), which describe how cellxgene expects data to be uploaded in AnnData, and the formats of cellxgene's downloadable matrix files.

Users interested in converting and uploading data to cellxgene should review the [schema_guide](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/blob/main/docs/schema_guide.md), which describes a process for curating datasets that adhere to this schema.

## Overview

This schema describes data that measure the phenotypes of cells.  

> It supports multiple assay types, but each assay takes the form of one or more two dimensional matrices whose values are quantitative measures of the genes of cells.

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/1e52fcb6f1f9ca452f4005827e87490e9b9a27f6

|---------------------------------------|-----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------|
| scRNA-seq (UMI, e.g. 10x v3)          | REQUIRED        | Values MUST be de-duplicated molecule counts.                                                                                                 | STRONGLY RECOMMENDED  |                                                                                                      | OPTIONAL     |
| scRNA-seq (non-UMI, e.g. SS2)         | REQUIRED        | Values MUST be one of read counts (e.g. FeatureCounts) or  estimated fragments (e.g. output of RSEM).                                         | STRONGLY RECOMMENDED  |                                                                                                      | OPTIONAL     |

### Integration Metadata

cellxgene requires ontology terms to enable search, comparison, and integration of data.

> Ontology terms for cell metadata MUST use [OBO-format ID](http://www.obofoundry.org/id-policy.html), meaning they are a CURIE where the prefix identifies the ontology.

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/1e52fcb6f1f9ca452f4005827e87490e9b9a27f6

When no appropriate ontology value is available, then the most precise accurate term MUST be used.
For example if the `cell_type` field describes a relay interneuron, but the most specific available term in the CL ontology is [CL:0000099 ("interneuron")](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/cl/terms?obo_id=CL:0000099), then the interneuron term can be used to fulfill this requirement and ensures that users searching for "neuron" are able to find these data.
Users will still be able to access more specific cell type annotations that have been submitted with the data (but aren't required by the schema).
A dataset comprising cells of the human embryo provides a more extreme example.
In this case, the most precise accurate term is [CL:0000003 ("native cell")](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/cl/terms?obo_id=CL:0000003)
The Cell Ontology is expanding over time, and we hope to migrate datasets to more precise terms as they are defined.
In the meantime, using Cell Ontology terms maximizes the findability (and therefore reusability) of datasets.

### Required Ontologies

> 

Author: Preferred "pin" to "freeze" but addressed in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/1e52fcb6f1f9ca452f4005827e87490e9b9a27f6

| assay_ontology_term_id | This MUST be a child of [EFO:0002694](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/efo/terms?short_form=EFO_0002694). If there is not an exact match for the assay, *clarifying text* MAY be appended in parentheses such as " (sci-plex)". | Curator |
| disease_ontology_term_id | MONDO term or [PATO:0000461](http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/PATO_0000461) | Curator |
| cell_type_ontology_term_id | CL term | Curator |
| ethnicity_ontology_term_id | `organism_ontolology_term_id` is “NCBITaxon:9606”. This MUST be either a HANCESTRO term or “unknown” if unavailable. <br><br> `organism_ontolology_term_id` is NOT “NCBITaxon:9606”. This MUST be "na". | Curator |
| development_stage_ontology_term_id | If unavailable, this MUST be "unknown". <br><br> `organism_ontolology_term_id` is “NCBITaxon:9606". This MUST be a HsapDv term.<br><br> `organism_ontolology_term_id` is NOT “NCBITaxon:9606”. This MUST be a child of [EFO:0000399](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols/ontologies/efo/terms?short_form=EFO_0000399). | Curator |
| sex_ontology_term_id | This MUST be a child of [PATO:0001894](http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/PATO_0001894) | | Curator |
| | |

> The ontology labels MUST be applied by curation software and MUST match the paired ontology term:

Author: Changed from the ambiguous "Software" to "Data Portal" in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/1e52fcb6f1f9ca452f4005827e87490e9b9a27f6

Cellxgene uses ENSEMBL gene identifiers to ensure that all datasets it stores measure the same features and can therefore be integrated.

| Organism | Required version | Download |
|:--|:--|:--|
| [ENSEMBL (Human)] | Human reference GRCh38 (GENCODE v32/Ensembl 98)] matching [cellranger 2020-A (July 7, 2020) release] | [gencode.v32.primary_assembly.annotation.gtf] |
| [ENSEMBL (Mouse)] | Mouse reference mm10 (GENCODE vM23/Ensembl 98) matching [cellranger 2020-A (July 7, 2020) release]| [gencode.vM23.primary_assembly.annotation.gtf] |

[ENSEMBL (Human)]: http://www.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/Info/Index
[gencode.v32.primary_assembly.annotation.gtf]:http://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/gencode/Gencode_human/release_32/gencode.v32.primary_assembly.annotation.gtf.gz"

[ENSEMBL (Mouse)]: http://www.ensembl.org/Mus_musculus/Info/Index
[gencode.vM23.primary_assembly.annotation.gtf]:http://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/gencode/Gencode_mouse/release_M23/gencode.vM23.primary_assembly.annotation.gtf.gz"

[cellranger 2020-A (July 7, 2020) release]: https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-gene-expression/software/release-notes/build

Every gene feature MUST be assigned a unique identifier.

> This is occasionally not present because of one-to-many mappings between gene symbols and other gene identifiers.

Author: Noted.

In cases where there are duplicated feature identifiers, they MUST be appropriately combined before submission.
This is required for the explorer to function.
When a user requests gene expression information, the explorer must unambiguously return a single value.

| Field name | Constraints | Annotator |
:--|:--|:--
| feature_biotype | "gene" | Software |
| feature_id  | ENSEMBL term from the required version corresponding to the organism for the gene feature  | Curator |
| feature_name | string. ENSEMBL gene name | Software |
|||

#### Dataset Metadata

The following fields annotate the whole dataset and MUST be provided.

**Field name**|**Constraints**
:--|:--
layer\_descriptions|Dictionary\[String\]|Keys MUST be the layer names whose values are free text description of how the layer was created (e.g. "counts per million")
version|Dictionary| MUST contain key `corpora_schema_version` and its value MUST be the schema encoding version. See [here](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/tree/main/docs/encodings/) for documentation that describes the encoding.

> batch_condition|String \| List\[String\]| values MUST match cell metadata keys. Together, these keys define the "batches" that a normalization or integration algorithm should be aware of. For example if "patient" "seqBatch" are keys of vectors of cell metadata `"patient"`, `"seqBatch"`, or `["patient", "seqBatch"]` would be valid batch_condition values.

Author: I have not decided to retain `batch_condition` in this version of the schema. So far, I have not edited this section.

              <td><a href="http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/EFO_0009899">EFO:0009899</a></td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td><i>10x 3' v3</i></td>
              <td><a href="http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/EFO_0009922">EFO:0009922</a></td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td><i>10x 5' v1</i></td>
              <td><a href="http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/EFO_0011025">EFO:0011025</a></td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td><i>Smart-seq</i></td>
              <td><a href="http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/EFO_0008930">EFO:0008930</a></td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td><i>Smart-seq2</i></td>
              <td><a href="http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/EFO_0008931">EFO:0008931</a></td>
            </tr>
          </tbody></table>
        </td>
    </tr>
</tbody></table>
<br><br>

### cell_type_ontology_term_id

<table><tbody>
    <tr>
      <th>Key</th>
      <td>cell_type_ontology_term_id</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>Annotator</th>
      <td>Curator<td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>Value</th>
        <td>categorical with <code>str</code> categories. This MUST be a CL term.
        </td>
    </tr>
</tbody></table>
<br><br>

> ### development_stage_ontology_term_id

Reviewer 3: I know the general life stage of my donor, but not the specific age at the resolution that is being asked of me here. How do I submit the following...
- My samples are derived from embryonic stem cells. I know 'embryonic', but not more specific than that
- I reused publication data that specified the samples were 'adult', but nothing more specific than that
- My IRB prevents me from sharing exact ages so I have the following values '40-50', '50-60', '60-70', '90+'

Reviewer: These are valid edge cases. What would cover all of them is to follow similar requirements as `assay_ontology_term_id`. I bolded suggested changes:

-------

<th>Value</th>
        <td>categorical with <code>str</code> categories. If unavailable, this MUST be <code>"unknown"</code>.<br><br>If <code>organism_ontolology_term_id</code> is <code>"NCBITaxon:9606"</code> for <i>Homo sapiens</i>, this MUST be <b>the most accurate HsapDv term with the following STRONGLY RECOMMENDED specifications</b>:
          <br><br>
          <table>
          <thead>
          <tr>
          <th>For</th>
          <th>Use</th>
          </tr>
          </thead>
          <tbody>
            <tr>
              <td>Embryonic stage</td>
              <td>A term from the set of <a href="http://www.ontobee.org/search?ontology=HSAPDV&keywords=carnegie&submit=Search+terms">Carnegie stages 1-23</a> (up to 8 weeks after conception; e.g. <a href="http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/HsapDv_0000003">HsapDv:0000003</a>)</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>Fetal development</td>
              <td>A term from the set of <a href="http://www.ontobee.org/search?ontology=HSAPDV&keywords=post-fertilization&submit=Search+terms">9 to 38 week post-fertilization human stages</a> (9 weeks after conception and before birth; e.g. <a href="http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/HsapDv_0000046">HsapDv:0000046</a>)</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>After birth for the first 12 months</td>
              <td>A term from the set of <a href="http://www.ontobee.org/search?ontology=HSAPDV&keywords=month-old&submit=Search+terms">1 to 12 month-old human stages</a> (e.g. <a href="http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/HsapDv_0000174">HsapDv:0000174)</a></td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>After the first 12 months post-birth</td>
              <td>A term from the set of <a href="http://www.ontobee.org/search?ontology=HSAPDV&keywords=year-old&submit=Search+terms">year-old human stages</a> (e.g. <a href="http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/HsapDv_0000246">HsapDv:0000246)</a></td>
            </tr>
          </tbody></table>
          <br><br>If <code>organism_ontolology_term_id</code> is <code>"NCBITaxon:10090"</code> for <i>Mus musculus</i></code>, this MUST be <b>the most accurate MmusDv term with the following STRONGLY RECOMMENDED specifications:</b>
          <br><br>
          <table>
          <thead>
          <tr>
          <th>For</th>
          <th>Use</th>
          </tr>
          </thead>
          <tbody>
            <tr>
              <td>From the time of conception to 1 month after birth</td>
              <td>A term from the set of <a href="http://www.ontobee.org/search?ontology=MMUSDV&keywords=theiler+stage&submit=Search+terms">Theiler stages</a> (e.g. <a href="http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/MmusDv_0000003">MmusDv:0000003</a>)</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>From 2 months after birth</td>
              <td>A term from the set of <a href="http://www.ontobee.org/search?ontology=MMUSDV&keywords=month-old&submit=Search+terms"> month-old stages</a> (e.g. <a href="http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/MmusDv_0000062">MmusDv:0000062)</a></td>
            </tr>
          </tbody></table>

Reviewer 3: Perfect

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/d3b0364c33a02f10ac088da0805bab39e0d1cb5f

    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>Annotator</th>
      <td>Curator<td>
    </tr>
   <tr>
      <th>Value</th>
        <td>categorical with <code>str</code> categories. MUST be the term that best describes the tissue that this cell was derived from, depending on the type of biological sample:
          <br><br>
          <table>
          <thead>
          <tr>
          <th>For</th>
          <th>Use</th>
          </tr>
          </thead>
          <tbody>
            <tr>
              <td>Cell Culture</td>
              <td>MUST be a CL term appended with <code>" (cell culture)"</code> (e.g. <a href="http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/CL_0000057"><code>"CL:0000057</a> (cell culture)"</code> for the WTC-11 cell line)</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td>Organoid</td>
              <td>MUST be an UBERON term appended with <code>" (organoid)"</code> (e.g. <a href="http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/UBERON_0000955"><code>"UBERON:0000955</a> (organoid)"</code> for a <i>brain organoid</i>)</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flow_cytometry#Cell_sorting_by_flow_cytometry">Sorted cells</a> from a tissue</td>

>               <td>MUST be a CL term (e.g. <a href="http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/CL_0000766"><code>"CL:0000766"</code></a> for sorted <i>myeloid leukocyte</i> cells)</i></td>

Reviewer 3: This one worries me a little. First, 'sorting' may be too narrow as you may want to capture various methods of cell type enrichment/isolation
More importantly, if I enrich leukocytes from kidney tissue, I would follow these guidelines and submit CL:0000738. But a user querying the database for 'kidney data' would not receive my data.

Reviewer 2: Good point. I reviewed the ontology and I think I picked a poor example, since immune cells are structured in the hematopoietic lineage, not tissues. I think it's still a good idea to include this line. Here's how I'd modify it:

For: Enriched, Sorted, or Isolated Cells from a tissue. 

use: MUST be an UBERON or CL term. SHOULD NOT use terms that do not capture the tissue of origin. (e.g. do not use CL_0000084, _T cell_ for CD3+ kidney cells. Use UBERON:0002113, for _Kidney_ instead. However, use CL:0000066, _Epithelial cells of the cervix_ for EPCAM+ cervical cells)

Tissue should be moved to the top - that's the most common use case. My fault for suggesting the rows in the wrong order.

Reviewer 3: I like the suggested modifications.
(but lowercase term labels _kidney_ & _epithelial cells of the cervix_ to match the ontology labels)

Author: > Tissue should be moved to the top - that's the most common use case. My fault for suggesting the rows in the wrong order.

Not your fault. By design. I've been sorting most columns (keys).

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/d3b0364c33a02f10ac088da0805bab39e0d1cb5f - Tissue on top.

            <tr>
              <td><i>10x 5' v1</i></td>
              <td><a href="http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/EFO_0011025"><code>"EFO:0011025"</code></a></td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td><i>Smart-seq</i></td>
              <td><a href="http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/EFO_0008930"><code>"EFO:0008930"</code></a></td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
              <td><i>Smart-seq2</i></td>
              <td><a href="http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/EFO_0008931"><code>"EFO:0008931"</code></a></td>
            </tr>
          </tbody></table>
        </td>
    </tr>
</tbody></table>
<br>

### cell_type_ontology_term_id

<table><tbody>
    <tr>
      <th>Key</th>
      <td>cell_type_ontology_term_id</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>Annotator</th>
      <td>Curator</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>Value</th>
        <td>categorical with <code>str</code> categories. This MUST be a CL term. 
        </td>
    </tr>
</tbody></table>
<br>

### development_stage_ontology_term_id

<table><tbody>
    <tr>
      <th>Key</th>
      <td>development_stage_ontology_term_id</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>Annotator</th>
      <td>Curator</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th>Value</th>

>         <td>categorical with <code>str</code> categories. If unavailable, this MUST be <code>"unknown"</code>.<br><br>If <code>organism_ontolology_term_id</code> is <code>"NCBITaxon:9606"</code> for <i>Homo sapiens</i>, this MUST be the most<br>accurate HsapDv term with the following STRONGLY RECOMMENDED:

Reviewer 3: If you read this statement leading into the **Use** column in the table below, it reads that it is STRONGLY RECOMMENDED that it MUST be...
Same with the mouse table for the property

Author: It is ordered and logical as I read it:

* MUST be the most accurate HsapDv term
* with the following STRONGLY RECOMMENDED

Reviewer 3: ...but then you STRONGLY RECOMMEND (it) "MUST be a term from the set of Carnegie stages 1-23"

Author: Doh. Thanks for catching this.

OK - I'll rewrite to STRONGLY RECOMMEND "~~MUST be a~~ A term ..."

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/42bd59f857767044302b378e84c9b05be29fbd4b

* **AnnData** - The canonical data format for the cellxgene Data Portal is HDF5-backed [AnnData](https://anndata.readthedocs.io/en/latest) as written by version 0.7 of the anndata library.  Part of the rationale for selecting this format is to allow cellxgene to access both the data and metadata within a single file. The schema requirements and definitions for the AnnData `X`, `uns`, `obs`, and `obsm` attributes are described below.

> * **Organisms**. Datasets MUST contain either Human or Mouse data. No other organisms are accepted by the cellxgene Data Portal. 

Reviewer 3: Technically a Dataset could contain Human or Mouse, but also contain other data, so the two statements are somewhat misaligned.
I would suggest "Data MUST be either Human or Mouse data. No other organisms are accepted by the cellxgene Data Portal."
But "Datasets MUST contain either Human or Mouse data." could also imply that a Dataset cannot contain both Human and Mouse data. If that is, indeed, a criterium, then I'd suggest "Datasets MUST contain either only Human or only Mouse data. A Dataset MUST NOT contain both Human and Mouse data, and no other organisms are accepted by the cellxgene Data Portal."

Author: We moved organism from `uns` to `obs` to support the mixed dataset. I will update to your suggestion.

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/8555f4bdced04471ba2c455e9c08c7ea82ab3d38

> * **Name Collisions in Metadata**. If a metadata key exists in the original dataset with the exact name required by the schema but with values that cannot be accurately mapped to the schema, `"key"` MUST be renamed to `"key_original"`. For example, if there is a `"cell_type"` in the original dataset with values that cannot be mapped, then it MUST be renamed to `"cell_type_original"`. 

Reviewer 3: Why have an opinion about what the non-schema field is called?
AnnData enforces unique obs keys, and cxg enforces the schema fields meet requirements, so I am not sure what needs to be mentioned here.

Author: > AnnData enforces unique obs keys

Just validated with Ambrose, AnnData does not enforce uniqueness.

Author: I'm happy to simplify:

1. Metadata keys specified in the cellxgene schema are "reserved" and MUST be unique.  Validation MUST fail if a duplicate of a schema key is detected. Validation will NOT attempt to choose between the duplicate keys and rename one.
2. I defer to @ambrosejcarr where he wants to request that curators rename collisions in a specific way for tracking or visibility. It was done in the past, because it was automated for apply which is now deprecated -  https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/blob/f54de6f710fbe7d66de76bec0249931b87e4930f/cellxgene_schema_cli/cellxgene_schema/remix.py#L59

Reviewer 2: > I defer to @ambrosejcarr where he wants to request that curators rename collisions in a specific way for tracking or visibility. It was done in the past, because it was automated for apply which is now deprecated -

I do not think we should specify collisions be renamed in a particular way; it seems impossible to enforce. *"cell_type_original"? Gross, my column was called "cell_type**s**"... promise*.

Reviewer 3: Apologies for my misunderstandings - thanks for straightening me out.
>Metadata keys specified in the cellxgene schema are "reserved" and MUST be unique. Validation MUST fail if a duplicate of a schema key is detected. Validation will NOT attempt to choose between the duplicate keys and rename one.

I like this.

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/d3d66a05fd26d5803004e7adb59bf73b021f39e6

> * **Redundant Metadata**. If a metadata key exists in the original dataset with a different name than required by the schema and with values that can be accurately mapped to the schema, it is STRONGLY RECOMMENDED that Curators request the permission of the author(s) to rename that key and remodel its values as needed to match the key and values in the schema to eliminate redundant metadata. Common cases are `"Sex"` instead of `"sex"` and `"Age"` instead of `"development_stage"`.

Reviewer 3: Age & development stage are not typically considered synonymous, and usually have different values.

I'm surprised to see this document make recommendations for interactions between curators & researchers. I would have expected submission-specific guidance, something closer to "It is STRONGLY RECOMMENDED to avoid multiple metadata fields containing identical or similar information."
But perhaps I'm reading it from the wrong lens?

Author: | Age & development stage are not typically considered synonymous, and usually have different values.

I've observed multiple cases in the data corpus where these were duplicates or close. Perhaps curators gravitated to Age as the source for development_stage.

> It is STRONGLY RECOMMENDED to avoid multiple metadata fields containing identical or similar information.

Nice. This is definitely more succinct but it still may be useful to offer some examples.

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/pull/67/commits/ff6c651fd9709f8a074d7d2d7faec4562b1778d1
